Zero trust paper (#1395)
cncf/tag-security: community/resources/zero-trust-whitepaper/v1/cloud-native-zero-trust-whitepaper.md

# Cloud Native Zero Trust Whitepaper

## **CNCF -  TAG Security: Designing Zero Trust Using Cloud Native Platforms**

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD036 MD025 MD024 MD033 MD013 -->
<!-- cSpell:ignore markdownlint Microservices microservices microsegment microsegments Microsegmentation microsegmentation Knative Knative's Linkerd Kindervag Forrester operationalized GCHQ UEBA apriori permissioning Coraza Curiefense Dapr Falco CISA -->
<!-- cspell:disable -->

TAG Security issue: [https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/issues/950](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/issues/950)

STAG Representative - Eddie Knight

Project Lead: Mariusz Sabath, David Hadas

**Version**: 1.0 **Created**: 30 Nov 2024

**Status**: WIP | **In Review** | Approved

**Last Reviewed**: DD MMM 2024, **PDF Published**: DD MMM 2024 **Release Version**: 1.0

**Final PDF Approvers** [] @name1 [] @name1
<!-- cspell:enable -->

> 

Reviewer: @mrsabath , @eddie-knight  
?? what are we missing here?

- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Appendix](#appendix)
  - [Glossary](#glossary)
  - [References and Citations](#references-and-citations)
  - [Contributors](#contributors)
  - [Reviewers](#reviewers)
  - [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
  - [Helpful Links](#helpful-links)

**Note**: All tools, projects, libraries mentioned in the paper are mentioned as examples when describing a relevant section. Hence, such mention **should not be** taken as an official recommendation by TAG Security or CNCF. Readers should evaluate adoption of such tools, projects or libraries based on their own understanding and threat model of the system under review.

# Abstract

Contrary to what the name might suggest, the real world application of “Zero Trust” is far more nuanced than simply *trusting nothing*. The Zero Trust defense strategy assumes that the internal network is not to be trusted. This contrasts with a perimeter-based defense, which is designed to construct a trustworthy internal network. Instead, we can introduce measures to evaluate trustworthiness, then use such evaluations to control the network communications and its connected devices.

> While many of the well-worn concepts behind Zero Trust apply to *any* system, there remains a gap with regards to discussing Zero Trust from a Cloud Native perspective. This document seeks to codify the philosophy alongside an ideal design for implementing it in a Cloud Native system.

Reviewer: I would argue that the concepts are well-worn, while I agree that the it is still a challenge to apply them to any system :) 
I.e. Many of the concepts defining how to build a ZTA are here with us for quite a while - not suggesting that we have the tools and mechanisms to implement them.

At the same time I am also perfectly ok with the suggested change - so I would vote to accept it as is.

> While many of the well-worn concepts behind Zero Trust apply to *any* system, there remains a gap with regards to discussing Zero Trust from a Cloud Native perspective. This document seeks to codify the philosophy alongside an ideal design for implementing it in a Cloud Native system.

Reviewer 2: Fair point.

> While many of the well-worn concepts behind Zero Trust apply to *any* system, there remains a gap with regards to discussing Zero Trust from a Cloud Native perspective. This document seeks to codify the philosophy alongside an ideal design for implementing it in a Cloud Native system.

Author: @TheFoxAtWork are you OK with us keeping it as is, or you like this to be changed per your suggestion? 
BTW I tried to find you at the conference to say "hello", but no luck...

The authors have compiled their experience and research findings into a set of principles and approaches. While many of the concepts herein are a distillation of past publications, extending those findings has led to a new proposal to standardize the generation and utilization of “Confidence Levels” as a data type. Confidence Levels quantify the trustworthiness of entities within a system, allowing for more dynamic and responsive security measures.

> Confidence Levels can be produced by “Active Observers,” a previously unnamed category of tools. Active Observers continuously monitor and analyze the security-related attributes and behaviors of entities in the system to quantify trustworthiness.

Reviewer: @TheFoxAtWork, We are not stating or suggesting that active observers are beneficial specifically in cloud native for achieving Zero Trust - these are beneficial in the broader technology ecosystem. 

We do state that “Active Observers,” are a previously unnamed category of tools - i.e. we help name and better define such tools and help explain how they are being used. There are mentioning of such capabilities in previous ZT docs, we take this one step further.

> By applying the philosophies of Zero Trust to an entire Cloud Native system with consideration paid to the unique context, this paper crafts a Cloud Native Zero Trust Architecture design. Using the latest technologies, it is becoming possible to build a system in such a way that Active Observers assign Confidence Levels to every entity in the system. This enables the architecture to adapt in real-time to emerging threats and anomalies, reinforcing the Zero Trust stance.

Reviewer: Lets replace to  singular form philosophy. 

As for Active Observers, IMHO this is becoming clearer later in the doc, we name what Active Observers are needed and how they are used. I think it is fine to keep this "as is" and I actually like the fact that it may intrigue a reader to read further about it in the doc...  :)

> By applying the philosophies of Zero Trust to an entire Cloud Native system with consideration paid to the unique context, this paper crafts a Cloud Native Zero Trust Architecture design. Using the latest technologies, it is becoming possible to build a system in such a way that Active Observers assign Confidence Levels to every entity in the system. This enables the architecture to adapt in real-time to emerging threats and anomalies, reinforcing the Zero Trust stance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By applying the philosophy of Zero Trust to an entire Cloud Native system with consideration paid to the unique context, this paper crafts a Cloud Native Zero Trust Architecture design. Using the latest technologies, it is becoming possible to build a system in such a way that Active Observers assign Confidence Levels to every entity in the system. This enables the architecture to adapt in real-time to emerging threats and anomalies, reinforcing the Zero Trust stance.
```

By incorporating the concepts of Confidence Levels and Active Observers, a cloud architect may come closer to true *Zero Trust* than previously imagined.

# 1. The Philosophy of Zero Trust

The concept of Zero Trust has undergone significant evolution, transitioning from a philosophical notion to a foundational cybersecurity model. The term "Zero Trust" was first coined by [Stephen Paul Marsh in his 1994 doctoral thesis at the University of Stirling](https://www.cs.stir.ac.uk/~kjt/techreps/pdf/TR133.pdf).

> In this work, titled "Formalizing Trust as a Computational Concept," Marsh introduced the idea that trust could be mathematically quantified, separate from human moral and ethical considerations. This theoretical framework established the groundwork for what would later become known as the Zero Trust philosophy.

Reviewer: This entire chapter was added to set the ground about the concept of Zero Trust and from here we discuss that trust could be mathematically quantified - it seems moving further way to mention AI quantification of trust is somewhat unrelated (although an interesting fun fact)

This model, which segmented networks into zones with varying levels of trust, aimed to eliminate the vulnerabilities of traditional perimeter-based security systems, where internal networks were often overly trusted.

The implementation of Zero Trust principles was notably advanced by [Google's BeyondCorp initiative in 2009](https://www.beyondcorp.com/#:~:text=The%20BeyondCorp%20Story,and%20devices%20access%20internal%20applications.). BeyondCorp shifted security focus from the perimeter to individual users and devices, emphasizing continuous verification and least-privilege access.
This approach was driven by the need to address sophisticated threats, as demonstrated by incidents like [Operation Aurora](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Aurora) and the [MUSCULAR joint surveillance program](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MUSCULAR) operated by the NSA and GCHQ against the internal networks of Google and Yahoo.

> The proliferation of open-source projects such as Istio, Knative, SPIFFE, and OpenFGA has also played a crucial role in advancing Zero Trust. These projects provide robust frameworks for identity management, policy enforcement, Security Behavior Analytics, and secure communication within cloud native environments.

Reviewer: Lets either remove this as suggested or as a minimum change as follows:
```suggestion
The proliferation of open-source projects such as Istio, Knative, SPIFFE, and OpenFGA may also play a role in advancing Zero Trust. These projects provide robust frameworks for identity management, policy enforcement, Security Behavior Analytics, and secure communication within cloud native environments.
```

> The proliferation of open-source projects such as Istio, Knative, SPIFFE, and OpenFGA has also played a crucial role in advancing Zero Trust. These projects provide robust frameworks for identity management, policy enforcement, Security Behavior Analytics, and secure communication within cloud native environments.

Author: Done through out the document

> The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has been pivotal in formalizing the Zero Trust model. [NIST's guidelines on Zero Trust Architecture](https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/207/final) outline key tenets such as continuous verification, least-privilege access, and micro-segmentation. These principles ensure that security measures are consistently applied across all network layers and endpoints, reinforcing the Zero Trust approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has been pivotal in formalizing the Zero Trust model. [NIST's guidelines on Zero Trust Architecture](https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/207/final) outline key tenets and principles to help build systems that follows the model.
```

> The history of Zero Trust started as a theoretical concept and evolved into a practical, essential cybersecurity framework. The contributions of early theorists, pioneering implementations by industry leaders, and the formalization by standardization bodies like NIST have collectively shaped the Zero Trust model, making it a cornerstone of modern cybersecurity strategies in cloud native environments.

Reviewer: How about making this the last paragraph of this section  and removing the rest. 
It is a summary of all that was said before in this section.  
If this still seems repetitive as a section summary, we can shorten it a bit.

> We advise that the tenets of Zero Trust are considered during the design of any networked system. There are many opinions and recommendations regarding what may suffice to construct a Zero Trust Architecture, and the reader is always advised to consider their organizational needs when tailoring a solution suitable for the protected system.

Reviewer: In a previous paragraph we indicated: 

"The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has been pivotal in formalizing the Zero Trust model. NIST's guidelines on Zero Trust Architecture outline key tenets such as continuous verification, least-privilege access, and micro-segmentation. These principles ensure that security measures are consistently applied across all network layers and endpoints, reinforcing the Zero Trust approach."

> We advise that the tenets of Zero Trust are considered during the design of any networked system. There are many opinions and recommendations regarding what may suffice to construct a Zero Trust Architecture, and the reader is always advised to consider their organizational needs when tailoring a solution suitable for the protected system.

Reviewer: I suggest this paragraph is removed. 
```suggestion
```

> In this paper, we wish to emphasize critical elements that we consider as important to construct  a Zero Trust Architecture, collate commonly accepted concepts related to Zero Trust and, in isolated cases, propose novel approaches to improve Zero Trust implementations.

Reviewer: @mrsabath lets remove or move to the abstract, it is misplaced here.

> In this paper, we wish to emphasize critical elements that we consider as important to construct  a Zero Trust Architecture, collate commonly accepted concepts related to Zero Trust and, in isolated cases, propose novel approaches to improve Zero Trust implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Cloud Native Principles of Zero Trust

> Building on the extensive discourse surrounding Zero Trust principles over the years, two foundational tenets have been established: *Assume a Breach* and *Always Verify*. When applying these tenets to cloud native environments, we have delineated eleven governing principles.

Reviewer: We lay out these principles in this chapter. 
@mrsabath  - maybe add "as discussed in this section".

> Building on the extensive discourse surrounding Zero Trust principles over the years, two foundational tenets have been established: *Assume a Breach* and *Always Verify*. When applying these tenets to cloud native environments, we have delineated eleven governing principles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on the extensive discourse surrounding Zero Trust principles over the years, two foundational tenets have been established: *Assume a Breach* and *Always Verify*. When applying these tenets to cloud native environments, we have delineated eleven governing principles as discussed below.
```

> To follow the tenet of *Assume a Breach*, organizations must operate as if their systems are already hacked. This mindset encourages the development and implementation of security strategies that are inherently resilient and capable of detecting, containing, and mitigating threats in real time.

Reviewer: We detail more and more on these principles that we derive later in the section and we do follow with identifying additional security controls etc. It sis a step by step process that we take the reader.

The following table summarizes the Cloud Native principles of Zero Trust as detailed in the remainder of this chapter.
The evidence for the principles below is discussed in **[NIST SP 800-207](https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/207/final)** chapter 2 *“Zero trust Basics”* with further details in chapter 3 “*Logical Components of Zero Trust Architecture*”*.* While the NIST paper discusses all kinds of systems, in generic terms such as assets and resources, here we focus solely on Cloud Native systems with a higher level of nuance.

<table>
  <tr>
   <td>
   </td>
   <td><strong>Tenet</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>Cloud Native Principle</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1
   </td>
   <td>Assume a Breach
   </td>
   <td>Every Image Includes Vulnerabilities
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>2
   </td>
   <td>Assume a Breach
   </td>
   <td>Every Service is Vulnerable
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>3
   </td>
   <td>Assume a Breach
   </td>
   <td>Every Service will be Exploited
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>4
   </td>
   <td>Assume a Breach
   </td>
   <td>The Cluster Network is Hostile
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>5
   </td>
   <td>Assume a Breach
   </td>

>    <td>Clients will Send Malicious Requests

Reviewer: It seems repetitive to spell out each one in the table and also in the below H3 sections. 
I believe the second column help connect the principles to the NIST Tenet which is part of covering where these principles come from.

>    <td>Clients will Send Malicious Requests

Reviewer: @mrsabath 
We continue to rely on you for making the changes and keeping the two documents inline. 

Where a reviewer made a specific edit suggestion, I am trying to help by reading the text with the suggestion and adding a thumb up for support. 

Where a reviewer commented without a specific edit suggestion, I am trying to either add my own  specific edit suggestion or commenting that it may be preferable not do a change.

>    <td>Clients will Send Malicious Requests

Author: I realized what you did @davidhadas and thank you for that. I really appreciate your help with managing the edits. I think I merged all the suggestions that were approved by you unless they require some further explanation or investigation.

>    <td>Clients will Send Malicious Requests

Author: Like this one: https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/pull/1395#discussion_r1838998888
Are we keeping it as is?

>    <td>Clients will Send Malicious Requests

Reviewer: I think we can keep it as is (unchanged) unless @TheFoxAtWork will reply asking to handle it differently.

>    <td>Clients will Send Malicious Requests

Reviewer: I think the text on that comment can stay as is, but lets see if others will also see a need for change and what that change may be.

It is common for organizations to become aware of vulnerabilities when Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs) related to their services are published. However, this awareness often comes after a period during which the services were susceptible to attack.
The absence of a known vulnerability does not equate to security; vulnerabilities may exist that have yet to be discovered or disclosed. CVEs are typically published following the detection and reporting by white hat security researchers, but malicious actors may exploit these vulnerabilities long before they are publicly known.

### 3. Every Service Will be Exploited

Organizations must adopt the perspective that any cloud native deployed service is susceptible to exploitation at some point. When deploying a service, it is essential to assume that it may be exploited through various vectors, including internal malware infiltration, insider misuse, or unauthorized access to credentials or control systems.

> This assumption necessitates a comprehensive and proactive approach to security, wherein continuous monitoring and rapid response mechanisms are integral components. By acknowledging the inevitability of exploitation attempts, organizations can better prepare to detect and mitigate threats promptly, minimizing potential damage.

Reviewer: We cover this later in the paper - 

Here we spell out the principles to follow - we suggest that the reader would consider that each and every service running on the CN may be exploited. 

Later in the doc we discuss how should the reader detect such a situation and what should happen next.

> This assumption necessitates a comprehensive and proactive approach to security, wherein continuous monitoring and rapid response mechanisms are integral components. By acknowledging the inevitability of exploitation attempts, organizations can better prepare to detect and mitigate threats promptly, minimizing potential damage.

Reviewer: @TheFoxAtWork  - Will you be ok with keeping this text as is given my comment above?
